>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 14...
CONFRONTING VLADIMIR PUTIN.
THE PENTAGON PLANS TO MOVE HEAVY
MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO COUNTRIES
NEAR RUSSIA.
FOREIGN WORKERS LIVING IN
SQUALID CONDITIONS AS QATAR
PREPARES TO HOST THE WORLD CUP.
AND PREPPING FOR LONG-TERM SPACE
TRAVEL.
EVEN IF WOULD-BE ASTRONAUTS CAN
GET TO MARS, CAN THEY GET ALONG
ON THE WAY?
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE LATEST ROUND OF NEGOTIATIONS
BETWEEN GREEK AND EUROPEAN UNION
OFFICIALS ENDED TODAY IN
BRUSSELS WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT,
AND AN E.U. SPOKESMAN SAID
"SIGNIFICANT GAPS" REMAIN.
A GREEK OFFICIAL SAID THE E.U.'S
INSISTENCE THAT PENSIONS BE CUT
REMAINS A MAJOR STICKING POINT.
GREECE COULD DEFAULT ON ITS
DEBTS BY THE END OF THE MONTH.
THE E.U. SAYS IT WILL ONLY SEND
MONEY IF GREECE CUTS SPENDING BY
TWO BILLION EUROS.
PRIME MINISTER TSIPRAS HAS
CALLED THAT "ABSURD".
GERMAN VICE CHANCELLOR SIGMAR
GABRIEL SAID TODAY THE REPEATED
NEGOTIATIONS MAKE THE PROCESS
LOOK "RIDICULOUS" AND THAT "AN
EVER GREATER NUMBER OF PEOPLE
FEEL AS IF THE GREEK GOVERNMENT
IS GIVING THEM THE RUN AROUND".
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT TODAY
ISSUED A REPORT CALLING ITS
CONDUCT DURING LAST YEAR'S WAR
AGAINST HAMAS ON THE GAZA STRIP"
LAWFUL" AND SAYING IT HAD DONE
ALL IT COULD TO AVOID CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES.
ISRAEL ACCUSED HAMAS OF USING
ITS OWN PEOPLE AS HUMAN SHIELDS
DURING THE SEVEN-WEEK CONFLICT
WHICH CLAIMED MORE 2,200
PALESTINIAN LIVES.
73 ISRAELIS ALSO DIED.
>> (translated): WHOEVER WANTS
TO KNOW THE TRUTH, LET THEM READ
THIS REPORT.
WHOEVER WANTS TO CONTINUE WITH
BASELESS BLAMING OF THE STATE OF
ISRAEL, LET THEM WASTE TIME
READING THE REPORT BY THE U.N.
COMMISSION.
WE, FOR OUR PART, WILL CONTINUE
PROTECTING OUR SOLDIERS.
THEY WILL CONTINUE PROTECTING
US.
>> Sreenivasan: THE REPORT WAS
APPARENTLY MEANT TO PREEMPT THE
IMPENDING RELEASE OF A SEPARATE
REPORT BY THE U.N. HUMAN RIGHTS
COUNCIL WHICH IS INVESTIGATING
WHETHER ISRAEL COMMITTED WAR
CRIMES DURING THE SEVEN-WEEK
CONFLICT.
ISRAEL HAS ACCUSED THE U.N. OF
HAVING A PRO-PALESTINIAN BIAS.
HAMAS SAID TODAY THAT ISRAEL IS
TRYING, IN ITS WORDS, TO CONTROL
THE INTERNATIONAL NARRATIVE IN
ANTICIPATION OF THE U.N. REPORT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S POINT MAN IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS SAID
TODAY THAT THE ISLAMIC MILITANT
GROUP POSES AN UNPRECEDENTED
THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES, BUT
HE SAID PRO-WESTERN FORCES ARE
MAKING GAINS AGAINST THE ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST GROUP.
PRESIDENTIAL ENVOY BRETT MCGURK
SPOKE ON MEET THE PRESS.
>> IN NORTHERN SYRIA, AS WE
SPEAK THE KURDS WITH ARAB, FREE
SYRIAN ARMY FIGHTERS AN SOME
CHRISTIAN ORGANIZED UNITS, THEY
ARE TAKING, THEY ARE REALLY
GIVING A BEATING TO ISIS AND
THEY ARE VERY CLOSE TO CUTTING
OFF THE MAIN SUPPLY ROUTE THAT
ISIS HAS INTO ITS CAPITAL OF
RAQQAH.
SO THERE IS A LOT GOING ON
CHUCK.
I THINK WATCH THE EUPHRATES
VALLEY OVER THE NEXT SIX MONTHS
FROM RAQQAH TO RAMADI TO
FALLUJAH.
WE'RE GONNA BE FOCUSED THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
AMERICAN POLITICS.
DURING AN APPEARANCE TOMORROW AT
MIAMI DADE COLLEGE, JEB BUSH IS
EXPECTED TO FORMALLY ANNOUNCE
HIS CANDIDACY FOR THE REPUBLICAN
NOMINATION FOR PRESIDENT.
TODAY, ON TWITTER, HE RELEASED
HIS CAMPAIGN LOGO, JEB 2016.
DURING AN INTERVIEW BROADCAST
TODAY ON CNN, JEB BUSH WAS ASKED
TO DEFINE HIMSELF.
HE ANSWERED THIS WAY:
>> WHO IS JEB BUSH?
>> WELL, JEB IS DIFFERENT THAN
GEORGE; JEB IS WHO HE IS.
MY LIFE STORY'S DIFFERENT.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM CALIFORNIA
TONIGHT, A REPORT THAT
ACCIDENTAL GUNSHOTS BY LOS
ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF'S
DEPUTIES HAVE MORE THAN DOUBLED
IN THE LAST TWO YEARS.
THIS ACCORDING TO THE LOS
ANGELES TIMES.
THE NUMBER OF INCIDENTS
REPORTEDLY JUMPED FROM TWELVE IN
2012 TO THIRTY LAST YEAR.
THE INCREASE COINCIDES WITH THE
DEPARTMENT'S SWITCH TO A NEW
KIND OF HANDGUN THAT DOES NOT
HAVE A SAFETY LEVER AND THAT
REQUIRES LESS PRESSURE TO PULL
THE TRIGGER.
ALSO IN LOS ANGELES THIS
WEEKEND, MAYOR ERIC GARCETTI HAS
SIGNED INTO LAW A BILL, WHICH,
DURING THE NEXT FIVE YEARS, WILL
INCREASE THE MINIMUM WAGE TO $15
AN HOUR.
THE CURRENT MINIMUM WAGE THERE
IS $9 AN HOUR.
AN ESTIMATED 600,000 PEOPLE IN
LOS ANGELES EARN THE MINIMUM
WAGE, THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEM
MINORITIES.
THE INCREASES WILL BE PHASED IN
BUSINESSES WITH FEWER THAN 25
EMPLOYEES WILL ROLL OUT THE
INCREASES MORE SLOWLY.
AND GOOD NEWS FROM SPACE TODAY.
THE FIRST ROBOT EVER TO LAND ON
A COMET HAS REAWAKENED AFTER
FALLING SILENT FOR ALMOST SEVEN
MONTHS.
THE EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY'S"
PHILAE" PROBE LANDED ON THE
COMET IN MID-NOVEMBER BUT
STOPPED COMMUNICATING TWO DAYS
LATER.
YESTERDAY, GERMAN RESEARCHERS
CAPTURED A SIGNAL THAT LASTED 85
SECONDS, LONG ENOUGH FOR THE
PROBE TO SEND A NEW BATCH OF
CHEMICAL DATA FROM THE COMET'S
SURFACE.
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE RUSSIAN
FORCES ANNEXED CRIMEA LAST YEAR,
THE UNITED STATES IS REPORTEDLY
POISED TO SEND HEAVY MILITARY
EQUIPMENT INTO SEVERAL EASTERN
EUROPEAN AND BALTIC NATIONS NEAR
RUSSIA.
IT'S MEANT TO REASSURE AMERICAN
ALLIES AND TO DETER RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN FROM
WHAT THE WEST CONSIDERS MILITARY
AGGRESSION.
NEW YORK TIMES REPORTER STEVEN
LEE MYERS BROKE THE STORY AND
JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
D.C. TO EXPLAIN THE PENTAGON'S
POSSIBLE PLAN.
SO WHAT KIND OF EQUIPMENT ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT HERE?
>> WE ARE TALKING ABOUT A
BRIGADE'S WORTH OF HEAVY
EQUIPMENT THAT WOULD INCLUDE
TANKS, ARMORED VEHICLES
ARTILLERY PIECES AND SO FORTH.
>> AND WHERE WOULD THIS BE
STATIONED?
>> WHAT THEY'RE LOOKING TO DO IS
TO DEPLOY IT IN SEVERAL OF THE
NATO ALLIES, A BULK OF IT WOULD
BE IN A PLACE LIKE POLAND, THEY
ARE LOOKING AT BULGARIA ROWE
MAIN APP YAH -- ROMANIA, AND
BALTIC NATION THAT ARE SEEN AS
THE MOST VULNERABLE TO RUSSIAN
ATTACK.
>> HAVE THESE COUNTRIES BEEN
ASKING FOR IT?
WHAT IS THEIR SENSE ON THE
GROUND OF WHY THEY NEED THIS
EQUIPMENT NOW?
>> THEY HAVE BEEN ASKING,
ACTUALLY.
AND IT'S OTHER NATO MEMBERS WHO
ARE A LITTLE BIT RELUCTANT.
INCLUDING THE U.S.
NATO DIDN'T LOOK AT RUSSIA AS AN
ADVERSARY BUT NOW THE CRIMEA AND
EASTERN UKRAINE THEY'RE LOOKING
TO REASSURE THE ALLIES ABOUT THE
UNITED STATES THE ALLIANCE'S
WILLINGNESS TO DEFEND THESE
COUNTRIES.
SINCE THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA
LAST YEAR NATO HAS BEEN STEPPING
UP A NUMBER OF EXERCISES THEY
HAVE BEEN DOING, TRAINING
MISSIONS AND SO FORTH.
YOU SEE A LOT OF INCREASED
ACTIVITY.
EVERY TIME THE UNITED STATES
PARTICIPATES, THEY HAVE TO BRING
THE TANKS, A ENORMOUS LOGISTICAL
LIFT.
TO HAVE THAT EQUIPMENT
PREPOSITIONED IN THE PLACE WREST
THESE TROOPS WILL ROTATE MORE
AND MORE FREQUENTLY AND FOR THE
TIME BEING.
>> SO HOW FAR ALONG IS THE IS
PLAN TO DEPLOY THESE WEAPONS,
THIS EQUIPMENT?
>> THE PENTAGON HAS BEEN WORKING
ON THIS FOR A NUMBER OF MONTHS
NOW AND IT'S EXPECTED THAT THE
SECRETARY ASHTON CARTER WILL
PRESENT THIS TO THE NATO DEFENSE
MINISTERS WHEN THEY MEET LATER
THIS MONTH.
>> IS IT IN ANTICIPATION TO AN
INCREASED AMOUNT OF
AGGRESSION FROM RUSSIA?
>> I THINK IT'S IN RESPONSE TO
AGGRESSION.
RUSSIAN EXERCISES ON THE BORDERS
IN THE BALTIC AREA PARTICULARLY
BUT ALSO IN THE SOUTH AROUND
OBVIOUSLY EASTERN UKRAINE AND
THE I THINK THAT THE NATO
ALLIES, NATO COMMANDERS ARE
LOOKING AT THIS AS A WAY TO
BUILD UP ASSURANCE A TRIP WIRE
IF YOU WILL, THAT YOU KNOW, ANY
MOVE AGAINST
ANY OF THESE NATO ALLIES VERY
QUICKLY AMERICAN MILITARY
EQUIPMENT AND THE TROOPS WHO
COULD QUICKLY RESPOND AND
FALLING ON IT.
>> ONE COUNTRY'S PREPOSITIONING
COULD BE ANOTHER COUNTRY'S WHAT
IS THE RESPONSE FROM THE KREMLIN
OR HAS THERE BEEN ONE YET?
>> THERE HASN'T BEEN ONE, AND
THERE'S NO QUESTION THEY'LL VIEW
THIS AS AN AGGRESSIVE ACT.
PUTIN FOR A LONG TIME HAS BEEN
COMPLAINING THAT NATO
SPECIFICALLY THE AMERICAN
MILITARY IS ENCROACHING CLOSER
AND CLOSE ARE TO RUSSIA'S
BORDERS.
AND IN FACT THE UNITED STATES
HASN'T BUT SINCE THE EVENTS OVER
THE LAST YEAR IT HAS BECOME MORE
AND MORE A REALITY WHAT PUTIN
FEARED MOST.
I THINK THERE ARE A LOT OF
STATES THAT DON'T WANT TO SEE US
BACK RESPONSE AND COUNTER
RESPONSE TIT-FOR-TAT BUILDUP BUT
THE FACT IS WITH YOU KNOW SO
MANY RUSSIAN TROOPS SO
CLOSE TO NATO'S BORDERS WITH THE
BALTIC STATES THAT YOU KNOW THE
PENTAGON IS CONSIDERING
BELIEVES IT NECESSARY TO SHOW A
LITTLE BIT MORE RESOLVE FOR THE
ALLIANCE.
>> ALL RIGHT, STEVEN LEE MYERS
OF THE NEW YORK TIMES, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: INVESTIGATORS
WARNED EARLIER THIS MONTH THAT
QATAR COULD LOSE THE 2022 WORLD
CUP IF IT IS PROVEN THAT
OFFICIALS FROM THAT PERSIAN GULF
NATION BRIBED INTERNATIONAL
SOCCER OFFICIALS TO GET TO HOST
THE GAMES.
THAT COUNTRY HAS ALREADY STARTED
WORK ON NEW STADIUMS, HOTELS,
HIGHWAYS, SHOPPING MALLS AND
AIRPORTS, HUGE CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS SAID TO BE WORTH
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
IT'S AN OPPORTUNITY FOR FOREIGN
WORKERS SEEKING HIGHER WAGES.
AND TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
NEPALESE HAVE MADE THE 21-
HUNDRED MILE TRIP IN SEARCH OF
WORK THERE.
BUT AS I.T.V.'S INTERNATIONAL
CORRESPONDENT JOHN IRVINE
REPORTS, ONCE THEY GET THERE,
MANY ARE LIVING IN SQUALID
CONDITIONS.
AND SOME ARE EVEN DYING.
>> QATAR AIRWAYS HAS THREE
FLIGHTS A DAY INTO KATHMANDU.
KATHMANDU.
THIS WOMAN WAITS FOR HER HUSBAND
BUT FOR MINA WHEN HE LEFT FOR
QATAR SIX MONTHS AGO, SHE WAS
HIS WIFE.
TODAY SHE'S HIS WIDOW.
A SAD SIGHT, THE AUTHORITIES
DIDN'T WANT US TO FILM.
THE HUSBAND'S COFFIN
27-YEAR-OLD SHEVA TAMANG DIED ON
A BUILDING SITE ACCIDENT ON
APRIL THE 19th.
TO COMBINE HIS WIDOW'S GRIEF,
THESE PEOPLE BELIEVE IN FUNERALS
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER DEATH.
THE DELAY FLIGHTS CONVENTION
HERE.
AS IF A SINGLE COFFIN WASN'T BAD
ENOUGH THERE WERE TWO OTHERS ON
THE SAME FLIGHT.
AGAIN THE BODIES WERE THOSE OF
YOUNG MEN, ONE HAD DIED IN A
TRAFFIC ACCIDENT, THE OTHER FROM
A SUDDEN HEART ATTACK.
CARDIAC ARREST IS THE AMOUNTED
TO BEING WORKED TO DEATH.
BUT HE DISAGREED, SAYING IT WAS
AN ORIENTATION PROBLEM.
>> WHEN THEY FINISH THE JOB THEY
COME BACK TO THEIR ROOM AND THEN
THEY OPEN THE AIR CONDITIONER.
SO THAT IS WHY IN THAT CASE,
THEY HAVE LIKE A HEART ATTACK
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
SO THAT'S WHY WE NEED A GOOD
ORIENTATION.
>> WITH NO WORK AVAILABLE AT
HOME THESE BE NEPALESE MEN ARE
QUEUING FOR PERMITS TO GO TO
THE GULF COUNTRIES INCLUDING
QATAR.
I HAVE CONCERNS BUT I HAVE TO
FEED MY FAMILY SAID THIS MAN.
LAST YEAR WE WERE INVITED TO
QATAR TO LOOK AT A NEW
ACCOMMODATION TO BLOCK MIGRANT
HOUSING WORKERS.
BUT WE FOUND THESE OTHER SQUALID
QUARTERS CRAMMED FULL OF
NEPALESE LABORERS, SLEEPING 18
TO A
ROOM.
OTHER BRITISH JOURNALISTS WERE
FOLLOWED, ARRESTED AND
INTERROGATED.
THE QATARIS CLAIM THAT
SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT HAS BEEN
MADE IN IMPROVING THE LOSS OF BE
WORKERS BUT SHE DISAGREES.
>> WE HAVEN'T SEEN ANY MARKED
CHANGES IN THE WAY THE WORKER
ARE FARING IN QATAR TODAY, AS
OPPOSED TO FIVE YEARS EARLIER.
>> SO THE WORLD CUP IS NOT THE
CATALYST FOR CHANGE THAT YOU HAD
HOPED FOR?
>> I DON'T THINK SO, NO.
>> THE BODY WAS TAKEN FROM
KATHMANDU AIRPORT FOR CREMATION.
AS MONKS PERFORM RITUALS, HIS
WIDOW PASSED OUT AND HIS MOTHER
WAILED.
THE QATAR WORLD CUP IS NOW UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
THE FBI AND THE SWISS ARE
COUNTING THE ALLEGED COST IN
BRIBES.
NEPAL IS COUNTING THE ACTUAL
COST IN LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: IT HAS BEEN
ALMOST A YEAR NOW SINCE WE FIRST
SAW THE VIDEO SHOWING THE
CHOKING DEATH OF ERIC GARNER AS
HE WAS BEING ARRESTED ON STATEN
ISLAND HERE IN NEW YORK.
THAT EVENT, ALONG WITH THE
POLICE SHOOTING IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, OF MICHAEL BROWN,
TRIGGERED NATIONWIDE PROTESTS.
WE'RE NOW LEARNING MUCH MORE
ABOUT THE CIRCUMSTANCES THAT LED
TO GARNER'S DEATH.
REPORTER BENJAMIN MUELLER IS
US WITH THE LATEST.
ONE OF THE FIRST REPORTS POLICE
MADE ABOUT THE INCIDENT
MADE NO REFERENCE TO ACTUALLY
ANYBODY'S HANDS BEING ON HIS
NECK OR HIS ARMS ANYTHING BEING
ON HIS NECK OR HIS ARMS ANYTHING
BEING AROUND HIS NECK YET YOU
QUOTE THE AUTOPSY AS SAYING ON
EXTERNAL EXAMINATION OF THE NECK
THERE ARE NO VISIBLE INJURIES ON
THE INSIDE WERE TELL STALE SIGNS
OF CHOKING.
WHY THIS DISCREPANCY?
>> YOU'RE RIGHT.
THIS IS AN INTERNAL POLICE
DOCUMENT PREPARED SOON AFTER HIS
DEATH AND SOON AFTER THE
PIVOTAL VIDEO CAME OUT THAT
IS SHOWED THE CHOKE HOLD.
IT CAME OUT FROM SUPERVISORS ON
THE SCENE AND SHOWED NO CONTACT
WITH ERIC GARNER'S NECK.
SHE SAW A CHOKE HOLD AND TOLD US
THAT SHE TOLD THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS WHO
INTERVIEWED HER THAT DAY THAT
SHE SAW A CHOKE HOLD TOO.
THE STATEMENT ATTRIBUTED TO HER
IS DIFFERENT THAN THE ONE SHE
SAID SHE GAVE THEM.
>> SO IF IT WASN'T FOR THAT
VIDEO THERE WAS A CHANCE THAT
VERSION OF THE TRUTH COULD BE
THE RECORD.
SHE'S ALSO BEHIND THE SECOND
VIDEO THAT SHOWS HOW THE
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS, THE
AMBULANCE FOLKS CAME IN THE
MEDICAL TECHNICIANS.
SUPPOSED TO BE TAKEN TO THE
HOSPITAL RIGHT AWAY.
WHAT HAPPENED IN THIS CASE?
>> FROM THE START THE EMTS WHO
RESPONDED KNEW VERY LITTLE WHAT
THEY WERE RESPONDING TO.
THE CALL CAME IN AS UNKNOWN, LOW
PRIORITY.
THEY DID NOT KNOW THAT POLICE
OFFICERS WERE INVOLVED, THEY
DIDN'T KNOW ERIC GARNER'S
CONDITION WAS, ALL CONDITIONS
THAT HELPED THEM PREPARE.
THERE WERE COMMUNICATIONS
BREAKDOWNS.
THE OXYGEN SUPPLIES WERE NOT
KEPT BY HIS SIDE, IN FACT THEY
ARE CARRIED AWAY FROM HIS SIDE
BY AN EMT TRAINEE WHO WAS ON THE
SCENE.
THERE ARE NO FIRE DEPARTMENT
SUPERVISORS WHO ARE ASSISTING,
BUT THIS DIDN'T START AS THAT
LEVEL OF SERIOUSNESS.
>> WHAT HAPPENS HAPPENED SINCE?
THERE ARE STILL INVESTIGATION
UNDERWAY, THEY HAVEN'T WRAPPED
UP BUT ARE THERE POLICE
DEPARTMENT CHANGES THAT
HAVE BEEN CREATED BECAUSE OF
THIS?
>> THEY HAVE CREATED A NEW
CENTRALIZED UNIT TO INVESTIGATE
DEATHS BY SHOOTING BY POLICE
OFFICERS.
IT IS NOT SURELY HOW THAT WAS
CONNECTED TO THE GARNER INCIDENT
BUT SURELY THAT IS THE STRING OF
DEATHS OF UNARMED BLACK MEN
AROUND THE COUNTRY THAT SET OFF
CALLS FOR A FORUM.
>> BENJAMIN MUELLER, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW CAN THE
OFTEN FRAUGHT RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN POLICE AND MINORITY
COMMUNITIES BE IMPROVED?
WATCH OUR INTERVIEW WITH TWO
FORMER POLICEMEN FROM EARLIER
THIS YEAR.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
THIS WEEKEND IN HAWAII, A GROUP
OF THREE MEN AND THREE WOMEN
COMPLETED THE LONGEST SPACE
SIMULATION EVER CONDUCTED BY THE
IDEA WAS TO SIMULATE CONDITIONS
ASTRONAUTS WOULD FACE LIVING IN
CRAMPED QUARTERS DURING A
PROSPECTIVE MISSION TO MARS IN
THE 2030s.
THE NEWSHOUR'S SASKIA DE MELKER
HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: HIGH ON THE SLOPES
OF THE MAUNA LOA VOLCANO IN
HAWAII, SIX PEOPLE, THREE MEN
AND THREE WOMEN, HAVE BEEN
LIVING INSIDE THIS DOME,
COMPLETELY ISOLATED FOR THE LAST
EIGHT MONTHS.
NASA AND THE UNIVERSITY OF
HAWAII ARE FUNDING AND LEADING
THE PROJECT KNOWN AS THE HAWAII
SPACE EXPLORATION ANALOG AND
SIMULATION OR HI-SEAS FOR SHORT.
THE ULTIMATE GOAL?
TO STUDY SOCIAL INTERACTION
AMONG CREW ON LONG TERM SPACE
MISSIONS, LIKE THE ONE TO MARS
THAT NASA HOPES TO LAUNCH IN THE
2030s.
AND DRIVING UP TO THE SITE ON
MAUNA LOA, IT'S EASY TO SEE WHY
THEY CHOSE THIS LOCATION.
>> THE SITE IS VERY GEOLOGICALLY
SIMILAR TO A YOUNG MARS.
THERE'S NO SIGNS OF HUMAN LIFE,
THERE'S NO SIGNS OF ANIMAL LIFE,
VERY LITTLE PLANT OR INSECT
LIFE.
>> Reporter: KIM BINSTED IS THE
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR FOR THE
HI-SEAS STUDY.
WE CAUGHT UP WITH HER VIA SKYPE
FROM HER HOME ON THE BIG ISLAND
OF HAWAII.
>> NASA CERTAINLY HAS A LOT OF
TECHNICAL CONCERNS TO CONSIDER
BUT ALSO THERE'S PROBLEMS TO DO
WITH THE HUMAN SIDE OF THE
EQUATION AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO ADDRESS.
SO THINGS LIKE HOW DO YOU PICK A
CREW SO THAT THEY'LL CONTINUE TO
WORK TOGETHER WELL OVER THE 2.5
TO THREE YEARS OF A MARS
MISSION.
AND HOW DO YOU SUPPORT THEM SO
THAT, TO BE HONEST, THEY DON'T
WANT TO END UP WANTING TO KILL
EACH OTHER.
>> YOU DON'T HAVE A LOT OF
PRIVACY AND PERSONAL TIME AND WE
ALL HAVE SO MUCH GOING ON.
>> Reporter: TO TEST THEIR
INDIVIDUAL AND TEAM BEHAVIOR,
THE CREW COMPLETED NUMEROUS
DAILY SURVEYS, TASKS, AND
COMPUTER GAMES.
THEY ALSO WORE DEVICES CALLED
SOCIO-METERS THAT MEASURE THE
DISTANCE BETWEEN THEM AND THE
VOLUME OF THEIR VOICES.
>> IF TWO PEOPLE ARE STANDING
VERY CLOSE TO EACH OTHER, THE
VOLUME OF THEIR VOICES IS VERY
HIGH, YOU MIGHT ASSUME THEY'RE
HAVING A FIGHT.
AND SIMILARLY IF TWO PEOPLE HAVE
NEVER COME NEAR EACH OTHER, THEN
MAYBE THEY'RE AVOIDING EACH
OTHER.
THOSE MIGHT BE WARNING SIGNS FOR
A PROBLEM THAT IS DEVELOPING
AMONGST THE CREW.
>> Reporter: THEIR COMMUNICATION
WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD WAS
LIMITED AND ON A 20 MINUTE TIME
DELAY.
BUT THE CREW DID MAKE AND SHARE
PERIODIC VIDEO DIARIES OF THEIR
EXPERIENCES.
>> SO ONE DISADVANTAGE WOULD BE
THE FOOD.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE FACED
WITH A NUMBER OF CONDITIONS
SIMILAR TO THOSE THAT ASTRONAUTS
ENCOUNTER ON SPACE MISSIONS.
>> SO HERE FOR EXAMPLE IS THE
GREEN AND RED BELL PEPPER AND
THEN WE JUST PUT HOT WATER AND
SOAK THEM FOR A WHILE TO
REHYDRATE.
>> Reporter: THEY COULD ONLY EAT
FREEZE DRIED AND SHELF STABLE
FOODS.
>> ON THIS SIDE WE HAVE ONE OF
EACH OF OUR MEATS.
SO WE HAVE SAUSAGE, BEEF,
CHICKEN, TURKEY.
>> HERE WE HAVE OUR ELECTRICAL
SYSTEM FOR THE HAB.
>> Reporter: LIFE IN THE DOME IS
POWERED BY SOLAR PANELS, AND
RESOURCES, INCLUDING WATER, WERE
RESTRICTED.
>> SO WE HAVE A TIMER HERE THAT
HELPS US KEEP TRACK OF HOW MANY
SECONDS AND MINUTES WE SPEND IN
THE SHOWER
>> Reporter: EACH PERSON WAS
ALLOWED JUST EIGHT MINUTES OF
SHOWER TIME A WEEK.
>> MISSION SUPPORT THIS IS HI-
SEAS ENGINEER ZAK AND I'M
REQUESTING ASSISTANCE.
>> Reporter: ON THE RARE
OCCASIONS WHEN THEY WENT
OUTSIDE, CREW MEMBERS HAD TO
FIRST REQUEST APPROVAL FROM
GROUND CONTROL AND WEAR
SPACESUITS WHILE EXPLORING THE
VOLCANO'S MARS LIKE LANDSCAPE.
MOST OF THE TIME THOUGH THEY
WERE CONFINED TO THE ONE
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET DOME.
>> HERE YOU HAVE THE ONLY WINDOW
OF THE HABITAT.
>> WE'RE DOING A TYPE OF
COMPOSTING THAT'S CALLED
BOKASHI.
>> Reporter: EACH PERSON HAD
THEIR OWN INDIVIDUAL PROJECT TO
KEEP THEM BUSY: FROM RESEARCH ON
MICROBIOLOGY AND HYDROPONICS.
TO WORK ON ROBOTICS
AND 3D PRINTING.
AND THEN THERE WERE DAILY GROUP
ROUTINES INCLUDING EXERCISING
TOGETHER.
>> BESIDES DINNERS WE ALSO MAKE
EXCELLENT DESSERTS.
>> Reporter: COOKING TOGETHER.
PERHAPS THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE
FOR CREW MEMBERS WASN'T BEING
SEPARATED FROM THE REST OF THE
WORLD, BUT THE INABILITY TO
SEPARATE FROM EACH OTHER.
>> THERE IS REALLY NO PLACE IN
THE HAB WHERE YOU CAN STAND AND
NOT BE HEARD.
>> ZAK, HOW'S MY COFFEE COMING?
>> IT'S NOT QUITE READY YET BUT
DO YOU WANT CREAM OR SUGAR?
>> BOTH PLEASE.
>> Reporter: YESTERDAY THE
SIMULATION CAME TO AN END.
TO CELEBRATE THE CREW TOOK A
JUMP "BACK TO EARTH".
AND, THEY'RE ALL STILL SMILING.
>> EVEN WHEN YOU CHOOSE VERY LOW
DRAMA PEOPLE AND WE'RE NOT A
REALITY SHOW, WHAT WE'RE LOOKING
FOR IS NOT A WAY TO ELIMINATE
ALL PROBLEMS FROM HAPPENING BUT
A WAY TO CHOOSE PEOPLE AND TO
TRAIN PEOPLE SO THAT THEY KNOW
HOW TO RESPOND TO CONFLICT AND
CAN DO THAT IN A REALLY
RESILIENT WAY.
>> Reporter: IT WILL TAKE SOME
TIME TO SYNTHESIZE ALL THE
OBSERVATIONS AND DATA COLLECTED
DURING THE STUDY.
BUT ANOTHER HI-SEAS EXPERIMENT
WILL BE STARTING SOON.
IN AUGUST A NEW CREW OF SIX WILL
ENTER THE DOME.
THIS TIME FOR AN ENTIRE YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY WE
REPORTED ON THE PUSH IN LOS
ANGELES TO END HOMELESSNESS
AMONG VETERANS
THERE.
AS PART OF ITS EFFORT, THE CITY
IS STUDYING WHAT EFFECT THE
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF NEW
HOUSING COULD HAVE ON THOSE WHO
SOMETIMES HAVE SPENT YEARS ON
THE STREETS.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
CARLOS FREY REPORTS.
>> FROM ITS OUTSIDE SCULPTURE
LIKE FORM TO ITS SLEEK LIGHT
FILLED HALLS, THE STAR APARTMENT
BUILDING IN DOWNTOWN LOS ANGELES
IS AN ARCHITECTURAL MARVEL.
BUT THIS COMPLEX ISN'T FOR THE
CITY'S HIPSTERS.
ALL 1,000 UNITS HOUSE FORMER
HOMELESS PEOPLE.
>> THE ISOLATION THAT SOMETIMES
PEOPLE FIRST EXPERIENCE AFTER
THEY COME OFF THE STREETS.
>> MIKE ALVIDRAS IS THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
IT HAS AMENITIES LIKE ARTS
STUDIO AND COMMUNITY GARDENS.
>> GOOD DESIGN IS
THOUGHTFULNESS.
IT'S REALLY THINKING ABOUT HOW
YOU LAY THE BUILDING OUT, HOW
YOU PROMOTE SPACES THAT ARE
CONDUCIVE TO PEOPLE HAVING THE
OPPORTUNITY TO RESOCIALIZE IN A
POSITIVE WAY.
THAT GIVES PEOPLE A SENSE OF
PRIDE, PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO
HAVE BEEN OUT ON THE STREET.
>> WHAT'S THIS PLACE LIKE?
>> OH IT'S NICE, YOU KNOW, YOU
HAVE PEACE OF MIND, YOU HAVE
YOUR OWN SPACE AND THEY NEED
MORE LIKE IT.
>> IN FACT, ARCHITECTURALLY
STRIKE HOUSING FOR HOMELESS IS
STARTING TO POP YOU AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
INCLUDING WASHINGTON, D.C., NEW
YORK CITY AND IN SAN FRANCISCO.
ALVIDRAS SAYS GOOD DESIGN ASK
ALSO WIN AWAY SKEPTICAL
NEIGHBORS.
>> THEY CAN SEE THIS NEW
BUILDING AS AN ASSET AND NOT
SOMETHING TO BE AFRAID OR FEARED
BECAUSE IT HAS HOMELESS PEOPLE
LIVING IN IT.
>> Sreenivasan: A BIT MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
SOME REMARKABLE PICTURES FROM
OVERSEAS.
FLOODS IN TBLISI, GEORGIA,
KILLED 12 PEOPLE AND SWAMPED
THE ZOO, ALLOWING DANGEROUS
PREDATORS TO ESCAPE AND ROAM
THROUGH THAT CITY OF MORE THAN
A MILLION PEOPLE.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
FOLLOW US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.